Another problem we might face in our dataset is that
our data format is not organized.
Usually the data doesn't follow an organized format due to a lack of
validations in the upstream input systems, for example,
a lack of validation in the database or the web UI
from which the data is entered.
For example,
a location column might be a city and country such as Madrid and Spain, only a
country such as Sweden, or only a city such as California.
As you can see, the data format is not consistent,
and that would be problematic for the machine learning algorithms.
So let's see what would be the possible solutions for inconsistent formats.
The optimal solution would be definitely ensuring that this does not
happen in the first place by making sure that the source systems
implement proper validation measures and provide us with as cleanly
formatted data as possible.
If in medicine they say, "an apple a day makes a doctor away," in data analysis,
I would say, "a validation a day makes inconsistent formats away." This is
usually easy to enforce if all the data you are relying on lies within the
boundaries of your organization. However,
it will be more challenging to enforce if the data you are
relying on is coming from external providers.
A very painful solution for this challenge would be to fix
the data manually, that is, to go through the dataset
instance one by one and fix the rows, which is often an impractical solution.
However, another solution would be to try to deduce patterns in the data.
For example, if you note that the city is always entered first,
then a space, you can write your custom logic to
parse that using regular expressions.
One modern solution would be to use some fuzzy matching
libraries that can match close enough string entries
against the correct string entries.
For example,
it would match "hotle" wrongly spelled to "hotel." A common
fuzzy matching tool is an algorithm developed by a Russian
scientist called Levenshtien distance.
You can read about it in the internet if you are interested.
A Python library that can help with fuzzy string matching is FuzzyWuzzy. I would recommend reading about it.